[DOC] Update metrics generator doc and add best practices (#2563)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/metrics-generator/cardinality.md

---
aliases:
- /docs/tempo/latest/metrics-generator/cardinality
title: Cardinality
menuTitle: Cardinality
description: What is cardinality and how it is impacted by metrics generation?
weight: 100
---

# Cardinality

Cardinality refers to the total combination of key/value pairs, such as labels and label values for a given metric series or log stream, and how many unique combinations they generate.
For more information on cardinality, see the [What are cardinality spikes and why do they matter?](/blog/2022/02/15/what-are-cardinality-spikes-and-why-do-they-matter/) blog post.

> Because writes are series, high cardinality does not make a big difference. However, cardinality can have a major impact on querying where you iterate over a lot more things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because writes to a TSDB database are in series, high cardinality does not make a big difference to performance at ingest. However, cardinality can have a major impact on querying where, the higher the cardinality, the more items are required to be iterated over.
```

This is also known as an increase in cardinality, and the number of active series generated for a metric is directly proportional to the number of labels that exist for that metrics alongside the number of values each label has added.

In a non-modified instance of the metrics generator, there are a small number of labels that are added automatically.
Because labels like `span_kind` and `status_code` only have a small number of valid values, the largest variable for the number of active series produced for each metric will depend on the number of service names and span names associated with trace spans.

The metrics generator can also be configured to also add extra labels on metrics, using span attribute key/value pairs which are mapped directly to these labels see the [custom span attribute documentation]({{< relref "../configuration#metrics-generator" >}}).

Be careful when configuring custom attributes: the greater the number of values seen in a specific attribute, the greater the number of active series will be produced.

> For example, if adding a custom attribute that includes unique customer IDs as a metrics label, if you have 100 customers this could multiple the number of active series generated by 100 (for example, going from 25,000 active series to 2.5M).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if adding a custom attribute that includes unique customer IDs as a metrics label, if you have 100 customers this could potentially multiple the number of active series generated by up to 100 (for example, going from 25,000 active series to 2.5M).
```

Always consider which attributes will actually be useful as labels for querying metrics, as well as the cardinality that they will increase metrics by.

> ## Estimate cardinality from traces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Estimate cardinality from traces for Service Graphs
```

> ## Estimate cardinality from traces

Reviewer: I'm not sure this section should move from Service Graphs or not, as it's only dealing with Service Graphs and not general cardinality for span metrics as a whole...

Author: I'll move this section back to the service graph and then link back to the cardinality.md page.

Author: Done.

The amount of edges depends on the number of nodes in the system and the direction of the requests between them.
Let’s call this amount hops. Every hope will be a unique combination of client + server labels.

For example:
- A system with 3 nodes `(A, B, C)` of which A only calls B and B only calls C will have 2 hops `(A → B, B → C)`

> - A system with 3 nodes `(A, B, C)` that call each other (i.e., all bidirectional links somehow) will have 6 hops `(A → B, B → A, B → C, C → B, A → C, C → A)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A system with 3 nodes `(A, B, C)` that call each other (i.e., all bidirectional link) will have 6 hops `(A → B, B → A, B → C, C → B, A → C, C → A)`
```
